foreign
thank you
we have a bit of feedback
no okay good
right and so what can we know about what
this conference is calling a day in the
Deep future uh 50 years hence I guess
we're all curious
about what life will be like by then
what new opportunities will have opened
up for people and what problems they'll
be thinking about
including maybe about their own future
um
also
what we may be able to do today
to
improve the chances of the faith
outcomes and and try to prevent the less
favorable ones
but before we can even think relevantly
about any of that there's a more
fundamental issue that we need to
address first namely
what kinds of thing are knowable in
advance and what is not I want to tell
you about a fundamental limit
on the
power of Science and Technology
and reason
to predict the future
and also about what we're going to have
to do about that
fortune telling has always been popular
to date
people want to know whether their plans
are going to succeed or fail
and
always been Prophets
claiming to be able to find out
all they really do is just either
tell people
tell the punters what they wanted to
hear and and take their money or they
threaten them with doom unless they
behave righteously
um in some sense and either way they're
just making stuff up
uh they have never had genuine knowledge
of the phenomena that they purport to
predict
and
for most of History
nor did anyone else
people just used a wishful thinking or
Superstition or at best
they used traditions and rules of thumb
that had worked in the past
um or were thought to have worked and
often they hadn't often structures
collapsed
crops failed ships sank people died of
treatments that were supposed to be
cures
nowadays such tragedies are much rarer
because we have scientific knowledge
which is predictive that's the defining
characteristic of science
and
that allows mistaken scientific theories
to be corrected when they make false
predictions
which allows for cumulative improvement
in our ability to predict
and it's not just cumulative
progress is exponential and that's
basically because scientific knowledge
is
not just testable it's explanatory it
derives its predictions
from
understanding of how things actually
work so we don't predict the
um the maximum uh Safe Load of a bridge
from past experience anymore we predict
it by understanding what makes
structures in general stand up
and that allows for new designs of
bridge that are not covered by any
existing rules of thumb
and it also allows Bridges to new ways
of creating knowledge like new
scientific instruments and computers and
communication and sheer wealth so uh
the the X one of the things that
explanatory knowledge provides is Is
wealth which allows for the creation of
new knowledge in the sense of increasing
the repertoire of physical
Transformations that human beings are
capable of causing or preventing also
and as this repertoire expands
and we increasingly cause the outcomes
that we prefer
our ability to predict those outcomes uh
those same outcomes correspondingly
increases
some things remain technically
unpredictable because they're random or
because they're so complicated that they
can't be distinguished from random
but that's no impediment to
predictability in the practical sense
because if science predicts that
something is random we can play the odds
and again technology allows us to change
the odds in our favor so uh I can uh if
if there's a random process such as
weather
then I can use an umbrella not only to
change the the probability that I will
get wet but also to increase my
probability of predicting whether I will
get wet
and So the faster we gain new
understanding and new technology the
faster our predictions also improve and
so
you might expect that
that our ability to predict the future
would be greater now than ever before in
history
and that isn't so because there's one
thing in our future that nothing
whatever is capable of predicting and
that is
the future course of knowledge itself
a simple example if there were a method
of predicting
today uh some scientific truth that is
only going to be discovered next year
then by using that method we would have
predicted we would have gained that
knowledge today and that's a
contradiction
not random
the the more we know the more we are
able to correct errors and so the less
random the future becomes what we are
going to discover is determined by
what we shall want and by what the laws
of physics the laws of nature allow and
and by what ideas are true and none of
that is random but none of that is
knowable in advance either
we can't even predict for very long
what future discoveries are even going
to be about
um the the possibilities that are opened
up by a new discovery are very often
new discoveries in their own right
for instance uh on this day 50 years in
the past nobody had ever connected
together two computers in different
buildings
nobody had a computer in their home
nobody could operate a computer except a
handful of Specialists and no one
predicted the consequences of computer
networking the the internet
that by today home computers would be a
Global Network which is a major channel
of trade and communication and
entertainment and education and nor did
they know when they connected those
first networking cables together
that they were igniting a process which
by today would be instrumental in the
overthrow of dictators
which brings me to what people will want
um 50 50 years ago some far-sighted
people realized that the new technology
of jet airliners was soon going to make
it normal for ordinary people to travel
abroad for jobs and education and and
holidays and they were right
that Revolution happened but they also
thought that by today
all that jet travel would be supersonic
and that has not happened
people at some point decided that
supersonic travel is morally
unacceptable
and and also the moon Colony the Mars
Expedition nuclear power
by even the late 1970s
people no longer wanted what people had
wanted by at the early 60s
and because of that unpredictable change
their prediction of what our lives are
are going to were going to be like uh
was false
that's part of a wider impediment to
prediction namely unforeseen problems
the fads and fallacies and blunders that
are going to seem like a good idea at
any time in the next 50 50 years by
definition we can't foretell now
so predicting our future is nothing like
predicting the strength of a bridge
every significant innovation has
unpredictable effects and they have
knock-on effects and after a few steps
of that the consequences and the and
their consequences come to be the major
component of what is happening
and as knowledge grows faster the time
for that to happen becomes shorter and
shorter
the growth of knowledge is the only
impediment to our ability to predict the
future but in this respect it's decisive
it will impose an ever closer planning
Horizon Beyond which we are blind to the
most important determinants of what is
going to happen so we Face a paradox
the more we create knowledge the less we
know about our future
and yet as ideas are Transforming Our
Lives ever faster it becomes ever more
necessary to plan and prepare for that
effect
this is a new predicament for our
species
historically knowledge was very sparse
it changed very rarely
and the little that people thought they
knew was was also mostly wrong
and so prediction
of the type that I've been discussing
was correspondingly easy
one could predict what life was going to
be like in 50 years time because it was
going to be much like one's own life
something like a plague might strike
unpredictably but the means of coping
with plagues would be unchanged there'd
be a different King
but the role of a king would be
unchanged the laws of the land the
people's means of making a living and
the the patterns of their personal lives
their values
that Common Sense none of that would
have changed our situation is profoundly
different all those things are already
changing on a time scale much faster
than a human lifetime
now mistakes are inevitable and the
exponential growth of knowledge causes
an exponentially increasing rate of
mistakes unforeseen mistakes
and so and we need to prepare for
contingencies that we don't know about
today because they're going to be
dominated by knowledge that we do not
yet have
or by ignorance that we do not yet know
is relevant
how do we do that well fortunately the
answer to that is knowable
the only thing that can solve this
problem
is the same thing that caused it in the
first place the power of explanatory
knowledge because
some explanations do reach beyond the
planning Horizon
the one example is the argument that
I've just been giving that the planning
Horizon has got to come ever closer
and another is that
although the content of our explanations
will be changing
the nature of explanation itself will
not
even beyond the planning Horizon
problems will be soluble by by
conjecture and criticism creative
thought error correction and that will
itself give right to new problems and so
on
so therefore
consider what kind of knowledge is
needed to cope with unforeseen dangers
and disasters both unintended and also
the malevolent use of Technology by
criminals or enemies of civilization the
only possible defense against that
against the
anthropist knowledge it's like
to prepare for an epidemic of a known
disease you can stockpile known cures
and known preventive means but to cope
with unknown diseases one needs General
explanations of how diseases and healthy
processes work
the same holds for all unknown dangers
and unknown opportunities we can only
prepare for them with explanatory
knowledge that was not created for the
specific purpose that it will eventually
be used for but for its own sake
we also need
the means of implementing unforeseen
Solutions that's technological knowledge
and again as powerful and general as
possible and wealth the ability to cause
Transformations as large as possible
knowledge
notoriously can be used for good or evil
but the growth of knowledge is good if
it ever slows down we're already in
danger among other things the the
world's bad guys need only get ahead in
one unpredictable way and they'll
threaten unlimited harm
the good guys because they try to
improve their values and objectives too
and also their means of making decisions
have what it takes to stay ahead and
discover and Implement defenses in time
if they choose to make fast enough
progress
Martin Reese has a metaphor for the
unknowable future that we are playing
Russian roulette with science as the gun
and and Technology as the bullets
but that would be random
what we're actually facing
is almost the opposite basically just
the structure of the physical world and
its immutable laws but we are running
into a world of unknown dangers and
opportunities and our only defense
against that is the universality of
explanatory knowledge
and the desire to create it
and to apply it
thank you very much
[Applause]